Let's start with the fundamentals,
how to go about running a design project.
Because if you run the design
project in the right way,
all of those other things we're gonna
touch on like presenting design,
getting feedback on the design,
ensuring the design flourishes.
Things like how to produce
a design an effective way.
If you're running the project
in the right way,
all of those things kinda naturally
fall into place much, much easier.
So that's why I wanna start by looking
at the fundamentals of actually running
a design project and what's involved.
So I think a good starting point in that
conversation is to kinda step back and
say, why is it that design
projects often struggle?
Why do they fail to deliver?
Well, in my mind there are kind
of three typical pitfalls,
if you like,
that design projects naturally fall into.
The first one is scope creep, right?
So once somebody can start
seeing design concepts,
once they begin to see the shape
of what you're producing for
them, then they start having ideas, right?
It's a completely natural thing,
a project is very nebulous and
quite hard for
people to picture in their heads.
But once you start creating something,
once you start showing them something
visual, then that sparks ideas,
and actually that's a good thing.
It's good that people can begin
to get invested in the project,
can begin to have ideas.
But, if you're working on a fixed price,
fixed deadline,
your fixed scoped project,
scope creep is the enemy, okay?
And it creates all kinds of problems,
it slows down the design process, etc.
So we need to be able to
deal with scope creep,
not to eradicate people's
ability to have ideas, right?
But to manage it in a way that
is appropriate, not just for
the design process, but for
the build as well, right?
Because obviously having a great idea
halfway through the build is much more
expensive to implement than it is right
at the very beginning of the project.
So, scope creep, that is one big
problem I see all the time with design
projects because that's what design does,
is it hopefully inspires and
makes people think of things.
The second big problem with
design is subjectiveness, right?
Design is utterly subjective, code isn't.
Code either works or it doesn't.
Okay, there are endless debates
about what coding framework you use.
There's endless debates about whether
you've done it in the most efficient way,
but at the end of the day it
either works or it doesn't.
Design on the other hand is
a totally different ballgame.
What I like as design will be completely
different to what you like as design.
Our view of design is heavily shaped
by our life experiences, right?
For example,
[LAUGH] I realized that I had a particular
dislike to a particular shade of blue,
right?
And when I thought about
where does this come from,
I realized that that shade of blue
was the shade of blue that my auntie
had on her curtains at her house, and
I really didn't like my auntie, right?
That is a classic example of,
we have all of these things,
reasons we don't like certain design,
certain color, certain typography,
because of weird associations that
we can't always even identify.
This causes problems because what
happens is in this situation is,
let's say we in this room,
we're trying to agree on a design,
now we've all got different likes and
dislikes about design.
And so what we'll try and
do is, we will try and
come to a compromise between something
that we can all tolerate, right?
And you end up with bland
design as a result.
If you don't design for somebody you
end up designing for nobody, right,
something that doesn't please anybody.
And that's why design by committee is so
bad, and creates so many problems, okay?
And worse still,
what often happens is you try and
take all the different
people's likes into account,
maybe you produce multiple design concepts
in order to try and find the right way.
And then people start picking and choosing
from these different design concepts, and
you end up with Frankenstein design.
Where you've got different bits from
different bodies kind of smushed together
into this horrendous monster.
And then obviously the big
problem when it comes to
subjectiveness is it leads to iteration.
It leads to, wow, okay, I don't like
that blue because of my auntie,
can we try it with green?
And now the green means that
the images don't work and so on, so
you get stuck in iteration hell, right?
Which has already been
mentioned in the chat.
And it will be the subject
that comes up again, and
again, where you literally cannot
get out of this loop of design.
And it goes something like this,
right, a stakeholder feels like
something is wrong with the design,
they're not entirely sure what,
it just doesn't pop for them, or
wow them, or whatever, right?
So what they do is they request a change
to the design that they hope will fix that
problem.
So it might be, can you change the blue
to red or something like that?
So you as a designer, because at this
point you've had the life beaten out
of you and you've lost the will to live,
you just give them what they want,
right, in an attempt to
kind of shut them up.
But when you make that change, then that
doesn't actually fix the problem, okay?
But that stakeholder isn't going to
admit that, they're not gonna say, no,
I was terribly wrong, go back to the blue,
no, cuz that's not human nature.
So what they'll do is, they'll try and
find something else that might
fix the problem, and
you go round and round in a loop.
Endlessly tweaking the design,
it progressively getting worse, and worse,
and worse, right?
So that is a big problem, and
that is one of the most
fundamental problems of design.
And why if you are sitting there as a pure
coder, and you don't get to currently
touch the design, if you're just design
curious, you can feel really smug
at this point because you don't have to
deal with this kind of horrendousness.
I nearly use a swear word there,
probably better not to.
So, that is iteration hell.
But what about those of us
that have to deal with that?
Well, how do we go about
avoiding some of these pitfalls?
Well, there's kind of three areas
that we need to start touching on.
Area number one is introducing some kind
of objectivity to the process, right?
So, instead of it being subjective,
I don't like blue because of my auntie,
right?
There needs to be some more kind of
objective way of measuring the success or
failure of design.
It's the only way you're gonna get away
from this process of kind of endless
iteration, and everybody having different
opinions, and design by committee.
So, that's one thing
that we need to achieve.
The second thing is we actually need
to involve the client more often,
now this might seem counterintuitive,
right?
One of the things that happened to me, and
I've seen it happen to
pretty much every designer,
is that early on in their career
they produce their designs.
And the client and the stakeholders
start to have opinions on those designs,
it gets demoralizing, it gets frustrating.
So what we tend to do is try and
shut out the stakeholders, right?
We don't show the developer for
example the design cuz they might
have an opinion on it, right?
[LAUGH] Or we don't show whoever because
we fear the feedback we're gonna get.
Now the problem with doing that,
the problem with having that kind of
mindset, is that if someone isn't
actively involved in something they
don't feel any ownership over it.
They feel excluded from the process,
they feel frustrated and ignored,
and actually that makes them more
aggressive in their feedback, right?
They wanna be heard.
And also because they've
got no sense of ownership,
they weren't involved in creating it they
can pick it apart all they want, right?
No skin off their nose.
So actually the big mistake that we make
of excluding the client from the process
actually makes it worse, not better.
So we need to look at how to involve the
client in the process to get them a sense
of ownership, and also use the process to
educate them about what good design is.
And then the final thing we need to do is
we need to reassure our clients, right?
Design feels dangerously close
to being art [LAUGH], right?
And art feels all a bit
kind of airy fairy, and
all a bit kind of ill considered
too many people, right?
They don't get art.
And design feels like this
mysterious thing, right?
So you give the brief to the designer,
the designer goes away and,
I don't know,
sprinkles unicorn dust over it, and
miraculously out of the end,
the design appears.
And because it's like this black box
of magic that they don't understand,
they're nervous.
We get nervous at anything
we aren't controlling or
anything we don't understand,
it's a natural human behavior.
So, a lot of the times where the client or
stakeholder is interfering in the design,
it's because they don't really
trust you as the designer, and
that can be really frustrating.
And I've seen a lot of designers get
almost petulant children of going, well,
I went to art college,
you've got to listen to me, and
that is not the way to get
people to trust you, right?
Instead, we need a robust process
that instills trust in people, okay?
So we wanna introduce some objectivity,
we wanna involve the client, and
we wanna build trust
through a robust process.